README.md, before:

# Metronome CLI

A powerful and flexible command-line metronome designed to enhance your internal timing and harmonic intuition with features like beat muting, BPM ramping, drone tones, and chords.

## Overview

The Metronome CLI is a versatile command-line tool designed to enhance your internal timing and harmonic understanding. It offers basic metronome functionality with advanced timing options including configurable bars-on/bars-off beat muting cycles, random beat muting, and BPM ramping for gradual tempo changes. Additionally, it aims to improve harmonic understanding by playing drone notes or chords in a progression.

The tool intentionally omits some standard metronome features like time signatures and accented notes to encourage users to develop a better internal sense of timing.

## Features

### Basic Metronome Functionality

- Play a metronome at a specified BPM.
- Adjust BPM while playing using interactive terminal controls.
  
### Advanced Timing Options

- Configure bars-on/bars-off cycles, where bars-off blocks mute metronome playback.
- Mute beats randomly by percentage.  
- Gradually increase and decrease tempo within a given range at a configurable rate.   

### Harmonic Features

- Play a drone note or continuous chord in the background.  
- Play metronome beats as notes or chords with configurable note length.  

### Missing Features

Some features of a standard metronome have not been included.

- Time signatures
- Accented notes
- Subdivisions

There are plenty of great metronomes available that provide these features if you need them. However, this metronome is intended to help you develop a better internal sense of timing. We want you to be able to keep track of the bar yourself, without relying on strong/weak beats from the metronome.

We prefer to keep the core metronome simple, in favor of more complex features to improve your playing and sense of time.

## Installation

### Direct Download

You can download a precompiled binary from the [GitHub Releases](https://github.com/eldss/metronome-cli/releases) page.

1. Go to the [Releases](https://github.com/eldss/metronome-cli/releases) page.
2. Download the appropriate executable for your operating system.
3. Move the file to a directory in your system's `PATH` (e.g., `/usr/local/bin` on Linux/macOS or `C:\Program Files\metronome-cli\` on Windows).

### (Planned) Using Cargo

To install the metronome CLI with Cargo, ensure you have [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) installed and run:

```sh
cargo install metronome-cli
```

### Compile Locally

Alternatively, you can build from source:

_Currently this is the only option until the package is developed further_

```sh
git clone https://github.com/eldss/metronome-cli.git
cd metronome-cli
cargo build --release
```

## Usage

### Basic Metronome

Play at 120 BPM:

**Lower your volume before playing this for the first time**


```sh
metronome --bpm 120
```

Seriously, lower your volume before playing this for the first time. I have taken pains to balance the mix of sounds, but depending on your own configuration and the options chosen, the output might be loud for your speakers or headphones. This will become more evident when using the drone feature.

I have noticed in testing on my own computer that USB headphones, at least the ones I own, distort the audio in weird ways. The click should sound similar to a closed hi-hat, pitched down to make it easier to listen to for longer periods of time. The harmonic tones should resemble a hammond organ...and be audible. If that isn't what you are hearing, try an analog connection or direct speaker output. 

If you have suggestions to improve the sound design and/or listening experience I would love to hear them! I want to make this tool usable for real musicians (who also happen to know how to use CLI tools!).

**Limitations**

- BPM is a whole number ranging from 30 to 300.

### Beat Dropping (Muting)

There are two ways to drop - or mute - beats during playback. Either drop a continuous length of notes in a regular pattern, or set a percentage defining the chance any given beat will be dropped (planned).

These features can be used to improve your internal sense of timing.

Play 4 beats on, 2 beats off:

```sh
metronome --bpm 120 --drop-beats 4,2
```

If the number of beats on and off is equal, you can specify just one number.

For example:

```sh
metronome --bpm 120 --drop-beats 4
```

This is equivalent to:

```sh
metronome --bpm 120 --drop-beats 4,4
```

(Planned) Drop 25% of beats randomly:

```sh
metronome --bpm 120 --drop-rate 25
```

Note that you provide the number of _beats_ not bars. The metronome does not have a set time signature, so a bar has no meaning. However, using `--drop-beats` you can effectively create 4/4 timing, where one bar is played and the next muted.

**Limitations**

- Dropped beats are whole numbers ranging from 1 to 32.
- Dropped rates are whole percentages ranging from 1% to 99%.

### (Planned) BPM Ramp (Speed Up/Slow Down)

Gradually increase from 60 BPM to 200 BPM at a rate of 5 BPM per second:

```sh
metronome --bpm 60 --ramp 200 --change-rate 5
```

Gradually decrease from 300 BPM to 100 BPM at a rate of the default 1 BPM per second:

```sh
metronome --bpm 300 --ramp 100
```

When using a ramp, the metronome will automatically reverse the ramp direction once it reaches end values.

**Limitations**

- Ramp is a BPM value with the same limitations: a whole number from 30 to 300.
- Rate is the change in BPM per second, defined as a whole number from 1 to 15.
- Dropping beats is not supported while ramping tempo.

### (Planned) Interactive BPM Adjustment

While the metronome is playing the terminal will display the current BPM. You can adjust the tempo interactively by pressing the up/down arrow keys to increase and decrease the tempo. The change will be reflected in the terminal.

Changing the tempo is disabled in ramp mode.

While playing
- Press ↑ / ↓ to increase or decrease BPM.
  - Disabled in ramp mode
- Press `q` to quit.

### Drones & Chords

#### Drones

Play a continuous drone note on top of a basic metronome click (middle C here):

```sh
metronome --bpm 100 --drone C4
```

Tones are generated internally and cannot currently be changed. But we hope to add some customization options in the near future.

You can also play a chord as a drone (C minor here):

```sh
metronome --bpm 100 --drone C3,Eb3,G3
```

I find higher octaves start to wear on my ears quickly. Consider experimenting with lower octaves first. And turn your volume down the first time you try a new setting, just in case. I have tried my best to balance the mix in a reasonable way, but I have only tested it on my own computer (Apple M1). Protecting your speakers and your ears is your responsibility!

Also note that when playing the metronome with drones, you may get a "pulse" at the top of the beat when the hi-hat plays. You may or may not prefer this. If you do not, consider halving the bpm or adding dropped beats to space out the clicks.

**Limitations**

- Tones can range from `Cb2` to `B#5`, where the letter is the note name and the number is the octave number (`C4` is middle C). Sharps and flats are supported using `#` for sharp and `b` for flat, as in `C#4` and `Db4`.
- The number of tones must be between 1 and 4 if provided.

#### Tones in Time

Tones and chords can also be played in time, creating a harmonic metronome:

```sh
metronome --bpm 60 --harmonic --tones C3,Eb3,G3
```

The harmonic metronome works with beat dropping as well.

The above example plays the same chord for every beat, but you can also define a chord progression (planned):

```sh
metronome \
--bpm 60 \
--harmonic \
--tones "Cmaj(C3 E3 G3),Gmaj(G3 B3 D4),Amin(A3 C4 E4),Fmaj(F3 A3 C4)" \
--progression Cmaj,Gmaj,Amin,Fmaj \
--beats-per 4,4,2,2
```

In this case, the `tones` argument defines four different chords with the labels Cmaj, Gmaj Amin and Fmaj. Each "chord" can have between 1 and 4 notes. These same identifiers are used in the `progression` argument to define the chord progression used. The number of beats each chord should use is defined with the `--beats-per` argument. In this case, Cmaj and Gmaj are used for 4 beats each, then Amin and Fmaj are used for 2 beats each.

`beats-per` can also accept a single number that is used for each condition, so `--beats-per 4` is equivalent to `--beats-per 4,4,4,4` in the example above. 

Note that the chord identifiers can be any alphanumeric characters plus the special character `#`. For example: `a,b,c,d` or `1,2,3,4` are equally valid as those above so long as they match between `tones` and `progression`. This would look like

```sh
...
--tones "a(C3 E3 G3),b(G3 B3 D4),c(A3 C4 E4),d(F3 A3 C4)" \
--progression a,b,c,d \
...
```

or 

```sh
...
--tones "1(C3 E3 G3),2(G3 B3 D4),3(A3 C4 E4),4(F3 A3 C4)" \
--progression 1,2,3,4 \
...
```

**Limitations**

- Every tone defined in `tones` must be used in `progression`.
- There can be at most 10 chords in tones, with each chord having between 1 and 4 notes.
- If you use the same tone chord key multiple times, the last one defined will be the one used.
- If `beats-per` is not a single number, then the length of the `progression` and `beats-per` arguments must be equal.
- If `progression` is present, `beats-per` must also be present. Further, `tones` is expected to take the form of `<ID>(T T T T)` with commas between each definition. Internal tones must be separated by spaces in this case
- Tones can range from `Cb2` to `B#6`, where the letter is a capital and represents the note name. The number is the octave number (`C4` is middle C). Sharps and flats are supported using `#` for sharp and `b` for flat, as in `C#4` and `Db4`.
- The number of tones must be between 1 and 4 per chord.
- Numbers in `beats-per` are whole numbers between 1 and 12.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Feel free to submit issues or pull requests.

## License

This project is licensed under the Apache 2.0 License.

## Appendix

### Valid Invocations

#### Basic Metronome:
Play the metronome with a basic click.

```sh
metronome --bpm <bpm>
```

#### Beat Dropping Pattern:
Play with <on> beats played and <off> beats muted. Given one number, it will be used for <on> and <off>

```sh
metronome --bpm <bpm> --drop-beats <on,off>
metronome --bpm <bpm> --drop-beats <on_and_off>
```

#### (Planned) Random Beat Dropping:
Mute a specified percentage of beats randomly during playback.

```sh
metronome --bpm <bpm> --drop-rate <drop_rate>
```

#### (Planned) BPM Ramp:
Ramp the bpm from a start to an end tempo and back again, at a given rate.

```sh
metronome --bpm <bpm> --ramp <target_bpm>
metronome --bpm <bpm> --ramp <target_bpm> --change-rate <rate>
```

#### Drone Tones:
Play a drone note(s) while the metronome is playing. Can play from 1 to 4 notes at a time.

Drone tones cannot be used with the harmonic metronome.

```sh
metronome --bpm <bpm> --drone <drone_tones>
```

#### Harmonic Click with Tones:
Play the given notes instead of a click. Can play from 1 to 4 notes at a time.

```sh
metronome --bpm <bpm> --harmonic --tones <tones>
```

#### (Planned) Harmonic Click with Chord Progression:
Play the given chord progression instead of a click. Like playing tones instead of a click, but allows defining groups of tones, the order they are played, and the number of beats each plays for.

```sh
metronome --bpm <bpm> --harmonic --tones <tones> --progression <progression> --beats-per <beats_per>
```

if `progression` or `beats-per` is used the command requires all three of the options seen after the `harmonic` flag, which is also required.

### Invalid combinations

Summary of Invalid Combinations
- `--drop-beats` and `--drop-rate` cannot be used together.
- `--drop-beats` or `--drop-rate` cannot be used with `--ramp`.
- `--tones`, `--progression`, or `--beats-per` cannot be used without specifying `--harmonic`.
- `--progression` requires `--beats-per` and `--tones`. Same for `--beats-per`, but `--tones` can be used on its own.
- `--progression` and `--beats-per` must have matching lengths or `--beats-per` must be a single number.
- `--progression` requires `--tones` to define tone combinations (chords) and the IDs in tones must match those in the progression. 
- `--progression` cannot contain tone IDs not defined in `--tones`.
- `--drone` and `--tones` cannot be used together.

Commit message:

Update README.md with additional instructions for Mac and Linux users

README.md, after:

# Metronome CLI

A powerful and flexible command-line metronome designed to enhance your internal timing and harmonic intuition with features like beat muting, BPM ramping, drone tones, and chords.

## Overview

The Metronome CLI is a versatile command-line tool designed to enhance your internal timing and harmonic understanding. It offers basic metronome functionality with advanced timing options including configurable bars-on/bars-off beat muting cycles, random beat muting, and BPM ramping for gradual tempo changes. Additionally, it aims to improve harmonic understanding by playing drone notes or chords in a progression.

The tool intentionally omits some standard metronome features like time signatures and accented notes to encourage users to develop a better internal sense of timing.

## Features

### Basic Metronome Functionality

- Play a metronome at a specified BPM.
- Adjust BPM while playing using interactive terminal controls.
  
### Advanced Timing Options

- Configure bars-on/bars-off cycles, where bars-off blocks mute metronome playback.
- Mute beats randomly by percentage.  
- Gradually increase and decrease tempo within a given range at a configurable rate.   

### Harmonic Features

- Play a drone note or continuous chord in the background.  
- Play metronome beats as notes or chords with configurable note length.  

### Missing Features

Some features of a standard metronome have not been included.

- Time signatures
- Accented notes
- Subdivisions

There are plenty of great metronomes available that provide these features if you need them. However, this metronome is intended to help you develop a better internal sense of timing. We want you to be able to keep track of the bar yourself, without relying on strong/weak beats from the metronome.

We prefer to keep the core metronome simple, in favor of more complex features to improve your playing and sense of time.

## Installation

### Direct Download

You can download a precompiled binary from the [GitHub Releases](https://github.com/eldss/metronome-cli/releases) page.

1. Go to the [Releases](https://github.com/eldss/metronome-cli/releases) page.
2. Download the appropriate executable for your operating system.
    - For Macs, x86_64 is for Intel chips, aarch64 is for M1 chips.
    - At this time linux is not supported. But if you have linux, you can probably manage building locally.
3. Move the file to a directory in your system's `PATH` (e.g., `/usr/local/bin` on Linux/macOS or `C:\Program Files\metronome-cli\` on Windows).

### (Planned) Using Cargo

To install the metronome CLI with Cargo, ensure you have [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) installed and run:

```sh
cargo install metronome-cli
```

### Compile Locally

Alternatively, you can build from source:

_Currently this is the only option until the package is developed further_

```sh
git clone https://github.com/eldss/metronome-cli.git
cd metronome-cli
cargo build --release
```

## Usage

### Basic Metronome

Play at 120 BPM:

**Lower your volume before playing this for the first time**


```sh
metronome --bpm 120
```

Seriously, lower your volume before playing this for the first time. I have taken pains to balance the mix of sounds, but depending on your own configuration and the options chosen, the output might be loud for your speakers or headphones. This will become more evident when using the drone feature.

I have noticed in testing on my own computer that USB headphones, at least the ones I own, distort the audio in weird ways. The click should sound similar to a closed hi-hat, pitched down to make it easier to listen to for longer periods of time. The harmonic tones should resemble a hammond organ...and be audible. If that isn't what you are hearing, try an analog connection or direct speaker output. 

If you have suggestions to improve the sound design and/or listening experience I would love to hear them! I want to make this tool usable for real musicians (who also happen to know how to use CLI tools!).

**Limitations**

- BPM is a whole number ranging from 30 to 300.

### Beat Dropping (Muting)

There are two ways to drop - or mute - beats during playback. Either drop a continuous length of notes in a regular pattern, or set a percentage defining the chance any given beat will be dropped (planned).

These features can be used to improve your internal sense of timing.

Play 4 beats on, 2 beats off:

```sh
metronome --bpm 120 --drop-beats 4,2
```

If the number of beats on and off is equal, you can specify just one number.

For example:

```sh
metronome --bpm 120 --drop-beats 4
```

This is equivalent to:

```sh
metronome --bpm 120 --drop-beats 4,4
```

(Planned) Drop 25% of beats randomly:

```sh
metronome --bpm 120 --drop-rate 25
```

Note that you provide the number of _beats_ not bars. The metronome does not have a set time signature, so a bar has no meaning. However, using `--drop-beats` you can effectively create 4/4 timing, where one bar is played and the next muted.

**Limitations**

- Dropped beats are whole numbers ranging from 1 to 32.
- Dropped rates are whole percentages ranging from 1% to 99%.

### (Planned) BPM Ramp (Speed Up/Slow Down)

Gradually increase from 60 BPM to 200 BPM at a rate of 5 BPM per second:

```sh
metronome --bpm 60 --ramp 200 --change-rate 5
```

Gradually decrease from 300 BPM to 100 BPM at a rate of the default 1 BPM per second:

```sh
metronome --bpm 300 --ramp 100
```

When using a ramp, the metronome will automatically reverse the ramp direction once it reaches end values.

**Limitations**

- Ramp is a BPM value with the same limitations: a whole number from 30 to 300.
- Rate is the change in BPM per second, defined as a whole number from 1 to 15.
- Dropping beats is not supported while ramping tempo.

### (Planned) Interactive BPM Adjustment

While the metronome is playing the terminal will display the current BPM. You can adjust the tempo interactively by pressing the up/down arrow keys to increase and decrease the tempo. The change will be reflected in the terminal.

Changing the tempo is disabled in ramp mode.

While playing
- Press ↑ / ↓ to increase or decrease BPM.
  - Disabled in ramp mode
- Press `q` to quit.

### Drones & Chords

#### Drones

Play a continuous drone note on top of a basic metronome click (middle C here):

```sh
metronome --bpm 100 --drone C4
```

Tones are generated internally and cannot currently be changed. But we hope to add some customization options in the near future.

You can also play a chord as a drone (C minor here):

```sh
metronome --bpm 100 --drone C3,Eb3,G3
```

I find higher octaves start to wear on my ears quickly. Consider experimenting with lower octaves first. And turn your volume down the first time you try a new setting, just in case. I have tried my best to balance the mix in a reasonable way, but I have only tested it on my own computer (Apple M1). Protecting your speakers and your ears is your responsibility!

Also note that when playing the metronome with drones, you may get a "pulse" at the top of the beat when the hi-hat plays. You may or may not prefer this. If you do not, consider halving the bpm or adding dropped beats to space out the clicks.

**Limitations**

- Tones can range from `Cb2` to `B#5`, where the letter is the note name and the number is the octave number (`C4` is middle C). Sharps and flats are supported using `#` for sharp and `b` for flat, as in `C#4` and `Db4`.
- The number of tones must be between 1 and 4 if provided.

#### Tones in Time

Tones and chords can also be played in time, creating a harmonic metronome:

```sh
metronome --bpm 60 --harmonic --tones C3,Eb3,G3
```

The harmonic metronome works with beat dropping as well.

The above example plays the same chord for every beat, but you can also define a chord progression (planned):

```sh
metronome \
--bpm 60 \
--harmonic \
--tones "Cmaj(C3 E3 G3),Gmaj(G3 B3 D4),Amin(A3 C4 E4),Fmaj(F3 A3 C4)" \
--progression Cmaj,Gmaj,Amin,Fmaj \
--beats-per 4,4,2,2
```

In this case, the `tones` argument defines four different chords with the labels Cmaj, Gmaj Amin and Fmaj. Each "chord" can have between 1 and 4 notes. These same identifiers are used in the `progression` argument to define the chord progression used. The number of beats each chord should use is defined with the `--beats-per` argument. In this case, Cmaj and Gmaj are used for 4 beats each, then Amin and Fmaj are used for 2 beats each.

`beats-per` can also accept a single number that is used for each condition, so `--beats-per 4` is equivalent to `--beats-per 4,4,4,4` in the example above. 

Note that the chord identifiers can be any alphanumeric characters plus the special character `#`. For example: `a,b,c,d` or `1,2,3,4` are equally valid as those above so long as they match between `tones` and `progression`. This would look like

```sh
...
--tones "a(C3 E3 G3),b(G3 B3 D4),c(A3 C4 E4),d(F3 A3 C4)" \
--progression a,b,c,d \
...
```

or 

```sh
...
--tones "1(C3 E3 G3),2(G3 B3 D4),3(A3 C4 E4),4(F3 A3 C4)" \
--progression 1,2,3,4 \
...
```

**Limitations**

- Every tone defined in `tones` must be used in `progression`.
- There can be at most 10 chords in tones, with each chord having between 1 and 4 notes.
- If you use the same tone chord key multiple times, the last one defined will be the one used.
- If `beats-per` is not a single number, then the length of the `progression` and `beats-per` arguments must be equal.
- If `progression` is present, `beats-per` must also be present. Further, `tones` is expected to take the form of `<ID>(T T T T)` with commas between each definition. Internal tones must be separated by spaces in this case
- Tones can range from `Cb2` to `B#6`, where the letter is a capital and represents the note name. The number is the octave number (`C4` is middle C). Sharps and flats are supported using `#` for sharp and `b` for flat, as in `C#4` and `Db4`.
- The number of tones must be between 1 and 4 per chord.
- Numbers in `beats-per` are whole numbers between 1 and 12.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Feel free to submit issues or pull requests.

## License

This project is licensed under the Apache 2.0 License.

## Appendix

### Valid Invocations

#### Basic Metronome:
Play the metronome with a basic click.

```sh
metronome --bpm <bpm>
```

#### Beat Dropping Pattern:
Play with <on> beats played and <off> beats muted. Given one number, it will be used for <on> and <off>

```sh
metronome --bpm <bpm> --drop-beats <on,off>
metronome --bpm <bpm> --drop-beats <on_and_off>
```

#### (Planned) Random Beat Dropping:
Mute a specified percentage of beats randomly during playback.

```sh
metronome --bpm <bpm> --drop-rate <drop_rate>
```

#### (Planned) BPM Ramp:
Ramp the bpm from a start to an end tempo and back again, at a given rate.

```sh
metronome --bpm <bpm> --ramp <target_bpm>
metronome --bpm <bpm> --ramp <target_bpm> --change-rate <rate>
```

#### Drone Tones:
Play a drone note(s) while the metronome is playing. Can play from 1 to 4 notes at a time.

Drone tones cannot be used with the harmonic metronome.

```sh
metronome --bpm <bpm> --drone <drone_tones>
```

#### Harmonic Click with Tones:
Play the given notes instead of a click. Can play from 1 to 4 notes at a time.

```sh
metronome --bpm <bpm> --harmonic --tones <tones>
```

#### (Planned) Harmonic Click with Chord Progression:
Play the given chord progression instead of a click. Like playing tones instead of a click, but allows defining groups of tones, the order they are played, and the number of beats each plays for.

```sh
metronome --bpm <bpm> --harmonic --tones <tones> --progression <progression> --beats-per <beats_per>
```

if `progression` or `beats-per` is used the command requires all three of the options seen after the `harmonic` flag, which is also required.

### Invalid combinations

Summary of Invalid Combinations
- `--drop-beats` and `--drop-rate` cannot be used together.
- `--drop-beats` or `--drop-rate` cannot be used with `--ramp`.
- `--tones`, `--progression`, or `--beats-per` cannot be used without specifying `--harmonic`.
- `--progression` requires `--beats-per` and `--tones`. Same for `--beats-per`, but `--tones` can be used on its own.
- `--progression` and `--beats-per` must have matching lengths or `--beats-per` must be a single number.
- `--progression` requires `--tones` to define tone combinations (chords) and the IDs in tones must match those in the progression. 
- `--progression` cannot contain tone IDs not defined in `--tones`.
- `--drone` and `--tones` cannot be used together.
